DIFFERENCES EXPERIENCED AT A CONSTRUCTION
PROJECT IN GHANA
Emem, Ghana Emem is a small rural community of approximately two hundred people situated in
the Eastern Region of Ghana beside Lake Volta. The community is of predominantly Ewe lineage,
run by a chief with the help of seven elder men. The majority of the men in the village work as
farmers and fishermen, whilst the women are farmers and traders. Prior to the water and sanitation
project the community collected water for all purposes, including drinking, from the Lake. There
were a couple of simple pit latrines in the village but these were privately owned by families and the
majority of the people living in the village had no access to a toilet. The project was intended to be
a water and sanitation project, to help the community gain access to clean drinking water and
hygienic sanitation facilities. At this time a water system has been constructed but work on the
toilets was delayed due to construction management issues. The construction was undertaken by
members of the community, with the help of a few paid labourers where skilled labour was
required.
• The engineer expected the community to express their opinions regarding the
sanitation and water project, including the procedure of the project, the design or any
other facet that the community wanted to discuss. However, it was seen that apart
from the elders and the chief, the community’s ordinary members had certain
inhibitions regarding expressing their opinions.
• It was also noticed during the project that if individuals ever voiced their opinions,
they preferred not to express opinions that conflicted with what others had expressed.
For instance, on a particular occasion, the engineer asked the opinions of two women
in a family. After the first shared her opinion, the second woman, who was younger,
was asked to share hers, but she refused to do so. Instead, she said that her mother (the
other woman), had already spoken.
• In another case, the engineer approached a woman, who had some problems in
walking, for her opinion. In the village, she happened to be the only lady with this
problem, so her opinion was sought in order to customize the design for water
collection and sanitation systems accordingly. However, this lady was reluctant to
voice any opinion regarding this, as she felt that her own well-being was not so much
significant considering the entire group. However, when the other women of the
community were asked, one suggested a flat design so that the lady with the walking
problem could collect her water easily.
• At the start of the project, the engineer could more or less comfortably organize the
work schedule and ensure good progress. Many members of the community lent
helping hands. However, when the project was drawing to an end, the chief showed a
temporary loss of interest due to two reasons. First, his mother had died and he was
arranging for the funeral. Second, he had an affair with a girl in a neighboring village
and was more inclined to meet her than perform his duties.
• When the community members started returning to work, they seemed lethargic, and
the engineer found it very difficult to complete the project within the stipulated
deadline.
Questions:
1. What are the bottlenecks, challenges and problems with the practice of Contract
Management in Ghana with respect to the operations of Contractors in the Construction
Industry of Ghana?
2. To what extent does Contract Management impact on the delivery of contracts in terms of
time cost and quality including Environmental, Health, Social, and Safety and Security
requirements?
3. What are the points an engineer posted in Ghana should keep in mind in order to carry out
his job successfully ?
4. Keeping in mind the cultural dimensions of Ghana, account for the slow infrastructural
growth of the country.